---
title: "How Git actually works?"
date: 2024-08-13
category:
---

## How Git works?

We commonly assume that the code is stored in two locations: GitHub and Local machine but actually, there are four main locations, they are
* Local Directory
    This is where we edit code.
* Staging Area
    Temporary area for storing the changes before commiting.
* Local repository
    The commited changes are stored here locally.
* Remote repository
    A server like GitHub for sharing and backing up code.

## The movement of code

The code usually moves between these four areas when commands are executed.
* git clone: Remote Repository -> Local Repository
* git checkout: Local Repository -> Local Directory
* git add: Local Directory -> Staging Area
* git commit: Staging Area -> Local Repository
* git push: Local Repository -> Remote Repository
* git pull: Remote Repository -> Local Directory(combination of git fetch and git merge)
* git fetch: Remote Repository -> Local Repository
* git merge: Local Repository -> Local Directory
* git switch or git checkout: Switch between branches of repository

## Git branches
Git branches allow you to diverge from the main branch enabling you to develop new features without disturbing the main code.

## git merge vs rebase vs squash commit
Let's say you have a main branch with commits A,B,C and a feature branch with commits D,E now merging these two will be like tying these with a knot.Merge creates a new merge commit F, joining these two braches.

Git rebase is like making the main branch linear. Let's say the feature branch has stemmed out from A and continued with D, E. So the base of feature branch is A and rebasing will make the base of feature branch as C making the commit history linear.

Git squash is like creating a new commit in the main branch by squashing all the commits in the feature branch into one. This comes with the loss of finite details of each commit in the feature branch. The commits in the feature branch will still be intact.