---
title: "Heap"
date: 2024-08-29
categories:
---
# Heap - Heap Sort - Heapify - Priority Queues

## Array representation of a Binary Tree
Theoretically, If a node is at index 'i'
* It's left child will be at index '2*i'
* It's right child will be at index '2*i+1'
* It's parent will be at index 'floor(i/2)'
These index criteria are automatically followed when you take an empty array and fill it with nodes of binary tree, level by level and you need to leave a gap when a particular node is absent.

## Full Binary Tree Vs Complete Binary Tree
* A binary tree with maximum no.of nodes is a full binary tree, meaning on addition of a node the height of the tree will increase by 1. A full binary tree will have 2^(h+1)-1 no.of nodes.
* A binary tree when represented in an array does not have any gaps between the elements then such BT is called a Complete Binary Tree.
Every full binary tree is a complete binary tree.
A complete binary tree is a full binary tree upto level h-1 and in the last level the elements are filled from left to right.
The height of a complete binary tree will always be minimum i.e, log(n)

## Heap 
* Heap is a complete binary tree
* In max heap, each node will have a value greater than or equal to all its descendants.
* In min heap, each node will have a value smaller than or equal to all its descendants.

## Insert operation on max heap
* Now consider a max heap having elements [50,30,20,15,10,8,16]. Let's suppose we want to insert an element '60'. We can observe that the element to be inserted is greater than any other element present in the array, i.e, max heap.
* We'll talk about the max heap in terms of array, so first append the element '60' at the end of the array, i.e, at index 8.
* According to our index criteria, the parent of index 8 will be at index 4 and element at index 4 is 15. Compare 15 and 60, as this violates the max heap condition swap 15 and 60. Now parent of index 4 is index 2 again compare and if max heap violated, swap. Keep on doing this process and 60 will reach its right place.
* After comparisions and swapping the max heap array becomes [60,50,20,30,10,8,16,15]
* The maximum time complexity required for insertion in a max heap is equal to height of binary tree, i.e, O(log n).
* The minimum time complexity requires is O(1).
* So to conclude,during insertion first we introduce the new element as a leaf and move it upwards by swaps.

## Deletion operation on max heap
* Consider the array [50,30,20,15,10,8,16]. Deletion can only be done on root. You can not remove any other element than root.
* On deleting the root, i.e, 50. The last element of the array takes its place. Then the array becomes [16,30,20,15,10,8]. Observe that this heap is not a max heap yet.
* Now, to make it a max heap compare the children of 16, i.e, 30 and 20 and choose the maximum, i.e, 30. Swap 16 with 30 and check the array and repeat the process until it obeys max heap property.
* In deletion, we send the element from top to bottom by swaps.
* Maximum time complexity is log(n)

## Heap sort
* If you observe while deleting we remove the max element and the array size decreases by one, i.e, the last place of array becomes empty
* If you keep on deleting the elements from the heap and place them in the vacant place created at the end of the array due to the deletion then we can get a sorted array and this is the concept of heap sort.
### Steps in heap sort
There are two steps in heap sort
* Make a heap by inserting all the elements you have
* Delete the elements from the heap one by one and you'll have a sorted array.
* The time taken is nlon(n) for creation of heap
* The time taken is nlog(n) for deletion 
* So the time complexity is O(nlogn) 

## Heapify
During insertion we move the elements in upward direction, i.e, from leaf to root.
But in heapify the direction differs.
* Heapify is a procedure for creating a heap.
* In heapify we follow bottom to up direction.
* Start from the right of the array
  * Check if the element has children
    * if no, then leave it as is
    * If yes
      * If the element and its children already form a max heap, leave them be
      * If not, find max of children and swap
* If the above steps are followed for all the elements of the array, we will have a max heap.
* The time complexity is O(n) so it is faster than normal creation of heap.

## Priority queue
* Usually a queue data structure follows FIFO but a priority does not strictly follow FIFO. The elements are inserted and deleted based on their priority.
* When deleting we want an element with higher priority.
* For smaller number, higher priority - create a min heap
* For larger number, higher priority - create a max heap